everyone laszlo Montgomery again back
after the usual break in the action
without any unnecessary chitchat or
chatter about what I've been up to and
why this next installment took this long
let's get right into it i'm using lynn
joiners excellent book honorable
survivor Mao's China mccarthy's America
and the persecution of john s service
published in 2009 by the Naval Institute
press we left off around the time of the
Honan famine 1942 to 44 3 million people
perished from starvation 30 rose bowls
filled to capacity no food to eat all
died imagine that if you can I can't
John service was one of the first to run
into this disaster and get the word out
to among others Theodore white white
together with Times of London journalist
Harrison Foreman went out and covered
the extent of the hood on famine and in
March 1943 got the story out to the
world except the story Theodore white
told In Time magazine didn't actually
get out and in this episode we're going
to focus on the reasons why his story
got out but at the same time didn't get
out the manner in which national policy
and ad hoc decisions were made regarding
China were decided from behind
Roosevelt's desk in the Oval Office now
in a normal functioning executive branch
a president will pick someone to handle
all these details for him and report to
him using all these vast resources of
the state department but Roosevelt just
as Nixon did when he opened up China in
1972 went around his Secretary of State
who in 1943 was of course still Cordell
Hull know the way FDR like to run things
was to surround himself with trusted
aides and cronies and have them find out
you know what needed to be found out and
because these men work directly for the
president they had a lot of access and
resources and because this is how FDR
ran things if you wanted to lobby the
executive branch
you had to deal with these gatekeepers
to the Oval Office and in 1943 the main
gate keeper for FDR as far as China was
concerned was Lachlan curry who we
mentioned last time curry officially
served as an economic adviser to
Roosevelt but the big guy also made him
the point man for China affairs he had
already made a couple of trips to
chongqing chong ching to meet with kmt
and ccp representatives and to do a
whole big fact-finding thing as a result
of his visit curry was responsible for
getting lend-lease turned on in China
and was knee-deep in the junk I check
vinegar joe Stilwell feud but he was the
guy if you wanted to get in a good word
with FDR lachlan curry was your man so
you had four sides the kmt in the ccp of
course deadly enemies since the Shanghai
massacre in 1927 but forced to pretend
to get along to fool the Americans now
besides the kmt in the ccp you also had
two factions in the US you had the very
powerful and formidable supporters of
junk Ishak and the entire nationalist
regime then lined up against these
stalwarts in the government and business
were the so-called China specialists
guys like John service John pant and
Davies Owen Lattimore Joseph still well
Clarence Gallison John Vincent Carter to
name a few they spent a lot of years in
China and just called it like they saw
it and that made them appear very
anti-gm very little of what they sent up
the chain of command was complimentary
of the Generalissimo and his handling of
the war effort against Japan so back in
DC you were lined up on one side or with
the other remember back in 2001 when
George Bush said you're either with us
or with the terrorists that was not too
far off from the atmosphere in 1942-43
with respect to the Nationalist
government of course led by Chiang
kai-shek this issue was nothing to be
neutral about and the flip side to not
being a nationalist government supporter
meant your
supporter of the Chinese Communist ergo
a communist sympathizer and probably a
closet communist yourself so all this
negativity flowing out of Chongqing
about how rotten a job John was doing
went against the grain as far as how
everything and everything about the
merits of the Nationalist government was
being spun in the halls of power and in
the press most notably of course by
Henry Luce and his time life
publications and it wasn't just Henry
Luce once the smoke had cleared at Pearl
Harbor Hollywood to jumped right into
the fray and stoked the myths about what
was happening in China 1942 saw the
Flying Tigers lady from Chongqing 1943
night playing from Chongqing and 1944
brought us dragon seed and 30 seconds
over Tokyo Young was America's darling
and his lovely elegant educated
well-spoken and best of all Christian
wife so maylene was the absolute jewel
in his crown she was his shining star as
far as galvanizing total American
support went who could resist her she
was like I'm San suchi without the
tragedy she represented China and all
that China was as far as the generally
uninformed American law by Shing were
concerned so anyone who said in so many
words these nationalist political and
military leaders were bad at their job
they really were alone salmon swimming
against a very strong current the three
big issues of the day that had caused
such a huge rift in the US China policy
had to be handled carefully these three
hot button issues were the matter of the
obvious KMT dictatorship and the
censorship and terror that went along
with that the corruption and the land
lease program and the general state and
achievements to date of the nationalist
army the China specialists all kept
pointing fingers at this and kept
inferring that the national
weren't being a reliable ally the cks
supporters covered it all up and said
you know what are you guys talking about
and these two groups just took endless
pot shots at each other sometimes
directly but mostly through their
proxies and allies and they battled it
out in the halls of power in Chongqing
and in DC a lot of powerful and
influential people believed we had early
on back the nationalists and at the
moment had arrived for our man junk I
shack his moment had come on the world
stage but he was under attack from not
only the Japanese from without but the
Communists from within so anything that
was put out there that undermine Jung
these guys didn't like it and they
especially didn't like it if anything
negative made it up to the president's
level or even to Lachlan curries so
Teddy White's March 1943 piece which
does not paint cks in an attractive
light is completely watered down under
Henry luces orders what made it into
Time magazine was a was a tragic and
horrific story but the politics and the
inferences about who should have done
what and when you were surgically
removed from the story and for years now
all these guys like John Service who
were resourceful reliable and rational
men on the ground who used their
language skills to go to a lot of these
nooks and crannies of the country and
they gathered information and report it
back to their superiors and if there was
too heavy a dose of truth in these
reports they'd end up being censored or
blocked from reaching the executive
branch level who was holding back the
truth and why what good did it do
American a stick its head in the sand
well 1943 was also the year that the OSS
started to get set up and comfortable in
China while bill had an operation set up
in chongqing his man there was a naval
officer and spooked from Naval
Intelligence named Milton II miles
couldn't find out why but his nickname
was Mary Mary miles was thick as thieves
with the Himmler of China dai Li
I was Jones chief of secret police and
one of his most trusted men he was
everyone's worst nightmare what Kang
Sheng was to the CCP later on dai Li was
to the kmt Dai Li by the way met John
kai-shek through a mutual acquaintance
named Julian aka big air do who we all
remember is the crime boss who got his
name on the marquee for the Shanghai
Massacre 1927 Dai Li is going to die
mysteriously in a plane crash in March
1946 it will be rumored later on netcong
hung himself was the black hand behind
that crash an organization was set up
that was funded by the OSS it's known by
the acronym saco SI co the sino-american
special technical cooperation
organization to show the Chinese what a
swell bunch of guys we were Dai Li was
put in charge as the top guy and Mary
miles was made his deputy sockos role
was coordinated intelligence gathering
between the Chinese and Americans there
are a multitude of amazing untold
stories about many of these Sacco agents
and their amazing and daring acts of
espionage against the Japanese from
Calcutta at chong ching there were two
thousand nine hundred and sixty four of
them US navy army Marines teaming up
with these american servicemen were well
over a hundred thousand chinese ranging
from train guerrillas to plain old
soldiers of fortune and patriotic thrill
seekers the efforts of Sacco by the way
led to the killing of more than 70,000
Japanese and the rescue of 76 downed
pilots who crashed behind enemy lines
they also carried out all manners of
guerilla tactics that really slowed the
Japanese down sometimes Dai Li in his
role as Sacco director manipulated
things quite well for himself his
American handlers couldn't have been
more uninformed or ignorant to the
secret dealings of this spy chief like
with everything about the KMT
cccp there are always two sides to every
story and general Daly has his
supporters as well as his detractors
around the time Socko was being formed
the rivalry between Chiang kai-shek and
general Stilwell was really starting to
hot up still well of course wasn't
buying into the whole myth of the
Generalissimo being peddled by the US
authorities neither was the ambassador
clearance cows they both called a spade
a spade and for this their intransigence
and continuing to point at and rant
about this elephant in the room Johnny
and his allies began to call for
Stillwell in Gauss's removal John did
not like those two guys and the feelings
were totally mutual when John's service
was back in the US in December 1942 and
leave he was very much in demand by all
the various defense intelligence
agencies same thing at the Department of
State people were anxious to hear what
he had to say he briefed everyone and no
doubt enjoyed his celebrity status as
this magnificent China hand back home on
leave and so willing to share the
stories of his exploits well not
everyone was glad he was in town he
ruffled a lot of feathers with his talk
about potential civil war and the
ineffectiveness of the Nationalists
fighting force there was one thing to
censor reports but it was hard to stop
all these face-to-face encounters
between service and lit to DC but no
matter how much bad news got out about
the lack of cooperation and Chongqing
and the backbiting on both sides FDR was
certain if he just picked the right guys
and the chemistry was right it would be
no problem to get everyone working
together to achieve all goals and
objectives FDR simply couldn't let go of
this concept Roosevelt as it was to most
American politicians who are not well
read or expert about China looked at
this situation through the prism of his
American experience FDR was a
dyed-in-the-wool politician of the
highest order he completely bought into
the notion that politics
was the art of the possible is Bismarck
said 1967 just need to pick the right
guys and get them all in a room together
and all will work itself out well that
indeed may be true but poor old FDR kept
picking the wrong guys so all these
calls from John's proxies for Stilwell's
recall from China and fell on deaf ears
General George Marshall Roosevelt's army
chief of staff although he lived to
regret it he stuck with Joe Stilwell he
later admitted that although Stilwell
was the most competent and the most
capable general to handle the mission in
the CBI theater the China Burma India
theater his directness and inability to
work well with others just negated all
the brilliance of still well as a
general and a strategist John Carter
Vincent one of John's services pals from
the Foreign Service arranged an
introduction between service and lachlan
curry Vincent like many at States were
wary that all China policy was coming
out of the White House he was hoping if
service could get through to curry and
give him an alternative picture of what
was going on in China it might allow FDI
erdem make more informed decisions about
US policy there and it was during this
fateful meeting between John's service
and lachlan curry that Service says it's
it's futile to depend solely on the cks
regime he strongly urged curry to reach
out to the chai calms and yen on and
investigate how they can be pulled into
the war effort he told curry plainly the
way things were shaping up civil war was
inevitable and the outcome might not be
in the u.s. favor service made it clear
to the president's aide that John's
priorities were to contain the
Communists first and defeat the Japanese
second and defeating Japan was probably
a distant second at-bat well he gave
curry the whole spiel from soup to nuts
and curry requested service to write
this all up in a report you know along
with his recommendations and if there
was one thing John service knew how to
do well it
write reports contained in the scathing
report or straightforward statements
like quote there appears to be a
movement away from even outward forms of
democracy and government it is now no
longer wondered whether civil war can be
avoided but rather whether it can be
delayed at least until after a victory
over Japan the question is raised
whether it is to Young's advantage or to
America's own interest for the u.s. to
give the kmt government large quantities
of military supplies which will be
available for civil war to enforce unity
in the country by military force so many
of you are wondering what's the big deal
we all know this but back in 1943 no one
was predicting this they didn't know
John service was one of the first who
was telling anyone would listen the
Communists were gaining popular support
wherever they went they were very
effective fighting up in the North
against the Japanese the nationalist
forces were hopelessly corrupt and
ineffective John was stalling Civil War
was coming and you know we all have to
find a way to begin taking measures to
hedge our bets and establish relations
with the Communists and yen on led by
Malta dong service suggested sending
some kind of an official group of
representatives to get on to make
contact with communists and investigate
options where by the communists could be
folded into the war effort against Japan
he further suggested real experts be
brought in as part of the delegation who
spoke Chinese and had some street cred
he purposely mentioned journalists would
not be good candidates for this mission
as their bias in favor of the Communists
was well known by then well this report
that John's service wrote it was red hot
and extremely radioactive it basically
went against everything that was
established American policy up until now
acting in the capacity like he was John
service was just just a pawn being
manipulated by higher-ups who used him
to make their point service was only too
happy to take on this role so he wrote
his report and brought it first to
Stanley Hornbeck who was
special advisor to cordell hull and had
two feet firmly planted with deep roots
in the cks camp he was the guy who made
this famous wager 10 days before Pearl
Harbor that the Japanese would not dare
attack the US hornbeck completely ripped
jack services report to shreds distant
in every possible way he had it quashed
and Hornbeck made sure this report never
saw the light of day but thanks to the
amazing technologies available in the
early 1940s service was able to use
carbon paper to make copies of his
report and it was leaked all over town
and that's when things began to get ugly
both sides began circling their wagons
these two factions those on jang side
and those seeking options beyond john in
the nationalists they took off their
gloves now the old guard establishment
was managing China policy through their
manipulation of what got heard or read
by roosevelt in cordell hull and it was
going to be a cold day in hell before
they allowed these Far Eastern
specialists to tear down what they had
built the OSS as I said were getting
themselves set up in China they too got
a look at this report that service did
and they sent norwood all men to invite
service for lunch and it was during this
lunch that they tried to recruit John's
service for the OSS knowing he had
already ruffled too many feathers had
stayed and seeing how his career was
going nowhere despite his dedication
service told almond he was game to join
this new budding spy agency the next
step was to meet Wild Bill Donovan
himself service met the living legend in
February 1943 Donovan was impressed and
tried to pull strings at the State
Department to get service back in north
China working for the OSS but one of
Stanley horn Beck's protges max
Hamilton chief of the China Affairs
Bureau put the kibosh on that and said
you know such a move would be perceived
negatively by Chiang kai-shek and no one
wanted to upset the Generalissimo
so now in early nineteen forty-three
John's service has already accumulated
some powerful and influential enemies
like I said no one liked any of these
provocative observations to get out and
when a high-ranking government official
quashes a report and it gets purposely
leaked anyway all roads led back to John
service well John service was spreading
the word about the things he saw in
china so mailing was in the middle of
her grand tour of the USA she spoke
before a joint session of Congress on
februari 18th and blue her admirers away
at venues such as hollywood bowl and
madison square garden then of course
Henry Luce and the whole Pro junk a ball
and Washington just built this whole
thing up to be almost as wonderful as
you know the second coming of you know
who the drum beat in the USA was beating
loud and steady in favor of our longtime
Ally nationalist China any talk that
intimated we should get to know Mao
Zedong and the chai calms was frowned
upon even back then Roosevelt was
calling nationalist China one of the
great democracies of the world April
1943 John services back in Chongqing and
told by lachlan carita keep this back
channel open keep him informed of
anything interesting going on there no
sugar coating or anything as soon as he
was back in China service was sent by
ambassador Gauss to lon Joe to man a
listening post there now today this is
an 18 hour drive almost due north
through the mountains but back then it
was a peerless two-week trip mary miles
gave service a suitcase stuffed with
chinese dollars and told him to take it
up to his man in lanzhou service of
course dutifully does this and when the
spooks counted the money in lon joe and
found it was three hundred dollars short
service covered the difference of self
lon cho was supposed to be a one-year
posting he set himself up inside the
home of some nice seventh-day adventists
missionaries and in no time at all he
was churning out the usual quality
stuff and keeping his superiors
thoroughly informed about all the
manners of things going on out and gansu
province this one year posting got cut
short and service was called back to
chong ching to serve in his new capacity
as a political advisor to general
Stilwell this new appointment had been
arranged by John Carter Vincent serving
alongside service was his boyhood friend
from Chengdu john patton davies davies
by 1944 was very powerful and
influential at the State Department
where matters of China were concerned
their job was among other things to keep
things cool between the departments of
state and war and between the US and
China Stilwell also made services
personal liaison to the Communists this
made John service effectively the sole
contact person between the US Army and
the Communists who still maintained
appearances in front of America and kept
a representative in Chongqing even
before he willingly and gladly took on
this responsibility Jack service was
already on the blackest part of Chiang
kai-shek and die Lee's hey me done but
knowing he was the Army's guy to liaised
with the CCP representatives it made him
even more disliked unbeknownst to dai Li
Stilwell was already going around him
and using his assets on the ground to
carry out their own operations that
could not be controlled or manipulated
by Dai Li or his men word on the street
that the War Department was that there
was going to be a lot of action in north
China as far as going in for the kill
was concerned this was where they reckon
they were gonna have to have the final
showdown with Japan because of this the
idea of cavorting with the Communists up
north changed from being an idea to a
necessity service began working with the
great man himself in Chongqing Joanne
lie to utilize communist intelligence
reports for the benefit of the US Army
serve has worked on a daily basis with
45 year old Joe there was an 11-year
difference between the two men Joe the
senior
the to the Intel provided via Joe and
lie was solid proven reliable and very
well received by Stillwell staff
nonetheless 1943 it was still a hard
sell to talk about anything positive
regarding the Communists in north China
Roosevelt was still a hundred percent
committed to his man Chiang kai-shek and
no matter what intelligence pointed to
the contrary FDR was not going to let go
of his vision of a free and democratic
China with China acting as our close
ally in Asia that was the way it was
going to be and if anyone said otherwise
they were gonna face stiff opposition
from the White House Winston Churchill
wasn't as gung-ho about young as
Roosevelt was yeah maybe he knew better
had better Intel Roosevelt wanted to
make Jang part of the new world order
once Japan and Germany were subdued
Churchill wasn't so sure but he had to
go along with FDR as far as meeting with
Jang at the chiro conference and
Roosevelt insisted to keep Jang fully
briefed on the outcome of the Teheran
conference this was all happening in
November 1943 Madame Chiang of course
came with her husband to Egypt to attend
the meeting held within eyesight of the
Giza pyramids Roosevelt met with John
between november 22nd at 26 in cairo and
then he met with stalin in tehran
november 28 to December first course
Churchill was within both times the
face-to-face meeting with the
Generalissimo didn't impress Roosevelt
there was something about John that FDR
instinctively didn't like when he
finally got to meet him and then after
meeting Stalin in person for the first
time Roosevelt you know his health now
officially in decline thought this was
the better guy to places chips on he
began to sense that Stalin might be the
better and more stable friend to have
way out that part of the world by the
end of 1943 John realized he was being
toyed with by the Americans they had
been making all kinds of promises
warrant for years the Burma Road was
still closed and no one had yet agreed
on a strategy out in the CBI theater
1944 was dawning and still all the aid
promised for years had not come or had
not common nearly the quantities
promised John headed back to Tron Chang
after the chiro meeting Roosevelt wanted
to keep John apprised of what was
happening in Tehran with Stalin for
diplomatic reasons you couldn't have
Stalin and junk I check in the same room
because of some treaty that was still
enforced between those two Russia and
Japan are not at war yet so John gets
back to where he once belonged and like
I said god forbid FDR should go through
the State Department to handle his
foreign affairs he still insisted to run
China policy from his office and who
needed ambassadors with years of
experience and a full-time staff of
China experts when you had cronies who
went way back and could be trusted to do
what you say and you know report what
they saw so into our story for a brief
moment drops Major General Patrick J
Hurley perhaps you've all at least heard
of him maybe not now let me say right
away he's going to be a major character
in the next episode in part three of the
series on the life of John service in
this visit Hurley is merely an envoy
from FDR keeping John briefed on the
details of the Tehran conference but
later on he is going to link arms with
Chiang kai-shek Dai Li and everyone else
with shares in that organization and he
is going to use every microgram of his
Pacific Ocean sized ego to show
unconditional support for Jim Hurley had
been up to this moment his life a
respected and successful lawyer
high-level government official and
republican party stalwart he had
performed well in the service of his
country his military titles however were
more earned through political successes
rather than through actual battlefield
experience he did serve in World War one
though we'll see in the next episode how
Hurley handled anyone who didn't toe the
party line as far as
complete dedication and support for the
nationalist regime and its leader Chiang
kai-shek this was official policy
whether anyone liked it or not but
John's service and all his colleagues
not to mention some movers and shakers
like General Joseph Stilwell an
ambassador Clarence gulfs we're telling
anyone who would listen John was pulling
the wall over all their eyes still well
in fact commented on FDR's blind support
of John when he said Roosevelt had quote
total misapprehension of the character
intentions Authority and ability of John
kai-shek and that song Mei Ling had
quote put it over FDR like a tent John's
government was a one-man joke the KMT
his tool madam Jung is his front the
silly us propaganda is his lever and we
are his suckers ah good old vinegar Joe
well by the end of 1943 FDR was still
firmly lined up behind his man John
kai-shek but after the chiro conference
Roosevelt finally took off the
rose-colored glasses and began to
consider other options John panton
Davies Jack services longtime friend had
some back-channel dialogue going on with
Harry Hopkins who was one of FDR's most
trusted if not the most trusted aide to
camp Davies fully briefed by the Foreign
Service officers in the field and having
read all of services reports was giving
Hopkins the hard sell as far as you know
looking for a backup to Jung just in
case Davies put a bug in Hopkins air
about sending out some kind of mission
to get on to meet up with the Communists
there and assess their capabilities at
this late stage they had to see if they
were people who the US could work with
Davies warned Hopkins a civil war
followed and mahou prevailed in the end
the Soviets would have too big of a jump
on the US and China would belong to them
instead of America he reasoned with
Hopkins that some sort of delegation
would send a warning to Jack about
launching a civil war would allow the
u.s. once and for all to see firsthand
what mile was up to in Northern shaanxi
Hopkins held on to that thought John
service meanwhile was still on loan to
vinegar Joe staff and was tasked with
the usual information gathering and
analysis you know how we China Watchers
in our internet age have the benefit of
all those news aggregators and the blogs
of dozens of experts on the ground John
service was a one-man Google News
Service if you wanted to know what was
going on around chong ching and what
people were talking about her what was
being written in the chinese press/john
service provided that service I knew
that pun would come sooner or later he
gleamed through the Chinese newspapers
and Chong Qing every single morning and
wrote summaries of the more important
stories and compiled a daily news report
that everybody read he was already doing
this before when he was part of the
Foreign Service now is part of Stilwell
staff he was just doing the same thing
JX service though he is going to live to
regret it was a little too generous with
this information he was gathering they
had a close rapport with a lot of the
journalists crammed data chong ching he
shared a lot of this information
believing it was you know just
background news and information not too
sensitive Stilwell didn't frown on this
and no one saw any harm in these reports
later on service is going to have to
make a lot of excuses in early nineteen
forty four the tide was changing as far
as American policy towards John was
concerned Roosevelt had been you know
tiptoeing around John for years and had
always been as careful as possible not
to offend you know although his broken
promises of support offended you know
John plenty but now FDR was getting
impatient and a lot had changed since
the chiro conference he finally allowed
himself to get talked into sending this
delegation to yen on to meet with the
communist once and for all John had done
well keeping the Communists and the
Americans apart for all these years but
now the pressure was just too great he
finally caved on this
and said the US mission could go ahead
but he attached some conditions of
course that you know initially prevented
them from reaching you not but this too
after some arm-twisting young allowed as
the months passed it became more and
more evidence the American observers in
China and in Washington that the
nationalist army was not going to be
able to get the job done against the
Japanese the Japanese had launched
operation Ichigo which was designed to
blow a hole through the center of China
and allow the Japanese military to go
from north to south and among other
things capture these annoying US air
bases that were giving them all kinds of
trouble with Roosevelt's favor beginning
to fade operation ichigo really took
some klieg lights and shown them on the
fighting ability of john's army the
japanese just blew right through all the
defense's from from more young the
changsha hung young kaylene all the way
to you know Joe in guanxi by the summer
1944 even the naysayers began to see the
nationalist army was not effective they
had their chance for all these years
going back to nineteen thirty-seven US
policy had been very strict in complying
with all the wishes of junk I shack
regarding relations with kindness he had
always got what he wanted up till now
but was so little to show for John's
authority and ability to force the
Americans to bend to his will came to an
end Stilwell saw this too he believed
the scent was in the air that might
allow him to push young aside and take
full control of the war and China and do
some real damage to the Japanese army
Roosevelt had begun sending Jang some
very strong messages two weeks after
d-day in Europe Henry Wallace arrived in
Chongqing he was vice president of the
United States for FDR's third term this
Wallace mission was going to be the
mission to end all missions and was
going to force a resolution with Jung
and you know his whole team Wallace was
tasked with talking sense to Jung and
forcing the Generalissimo in his
weakened political state to back down to
us demands to
find some way to get along with ma and
bring the Communists into the fight so
this Wallace mission is going to take an
already bad situation and make it much
worse and it's at this point where I
really begin to sympathize with young
and see what a tragic figure he is in
modern history chiang kai-shek like most
of his kind didn't buy into all the
communist propaganda about their
fighting prowess they're polite soldiers
and bringing great things to all these
towns and villages they visited John
knew probably better than anyone else
what mall was capable of no one in
America could understand ma as well as
John did after Japan went down for the
count John was certain either he was
going to be ruling China from Nanjing or
it would be mild Saddam ruling China
from Beijing it did nothing less than
boggle John kai-shek's mind that the
u.s. placed so much faith and trust in
the Communists he kept trying to tell
the revolving door of visiting officials
from the US now Henry Wallace that the
u.s. understanding was completely naive
with regard to the CCP and the Soviets
and you know with regard to the CCP
sincerity to maintain a united front it
was a total myth and it wasn't going to
happen and as I said young couldn't
stand the Ambassador Clarence Gauss nor
the top military guy in China you know
still well all the people tasked with
finding a solution to the problem either
were lined up against one another just
couldn't stand each other that was the
essence of the problem despite all the
expert advice being given the general
mood in Washington you know so far away
from Chongqing was that well if the u.s.
can do just fine with two political
parties at each other's throats surely
mile and john could figure out some way
to get together nobody was reading the
fine print it was classic FDR sending
these emissaries he had a kid that's
which young and try and bend his hair to
cozy up tomorrow and then we could all
join together at whipped Japan so after
two visits from lachlan curry and then
from wendell willkie and others along
comes the u.s. vp henry wallace with his
delegation consisting of
experts Owen Lattimore and John Carter
Vincent what followed was another
classic case of a bungled mission man if
they only had the internet back then
events were happening faster on the
ground than the communicated
instructions could provide for so when
John service showed up at an afternoon
session of the Wallace young meeting
right away the mood changed by now Jung
and Madame John knew very well who John
service was and as far as they were
concerned he was miles secret agents he
was an enemy to the John regime and now
this dangerous stooge of the Communists
was suddenly involved in their
negotiations with the Americans and you
know they knew he knew what they knew
about what they had up their sleeve
about what was going to happen when so
John was in the room with Wallace and
he's frustrated because these guys
obviously have no understanding or
appreciation for the political situation
in China he knew they were living in a
dream as far as Mao and the Communists
went and now into this meeting what's
John service who John considered one of
my biggest cheerleaders in the u.s.
contingent in Chongqing the US
negotiators had John backed into a
corner and no longer could the
Generalissimo hold them at bay and use
his prestige real or imagined to keep
the Americans from talking openly and
freely with the Communists now he bowed
to the inevitable and gave the reluctant
ok to allow an American observer group
to visit yen on and that is where we are
going to pick up next time at the royal
china history podcast the upshot of the
jun 1944 Wallace mission was that what
later became known as the Dixie mission
is going to get green lighted and we'll
move ahead that's for next time for now
this is laszlo Montgomery signing off
from the springhill suites a Marriott
company here in Bentonville Arkansas yes
the Bentonville Arkansas county seat of
Benton County and here for a couple of
presentations one of the local
businesses here and then back to
Claremont tomorrow night so John service
part 3 coming next week the Dixie
mission and the whole irritating and
frustrating debacle of Patrick
Early's time there if you can't wait the
10 days to two weeks for the next
episode to come out to find out what
happens go ahead and buy Lynn joiners
book honorable survivor take care
everyone and I hope you'll join me next
time for another exciting episode of the
China history podcast